

It is not my intention to write an autobiogra-
phy. Such would not be very interesting reading.
This is only an account of my reactions to America,
—to its political, social, religious, and economic
conditions as compared to those of my homeland
as they were when I left it nearly ﬁfty years ago;
and I shall try to keep my personal self in the back-
ground as much as possible. In order, however,
to clear my viewpoint, I have to tell something
about myself so you can get an idea of what kind
of mentality I had when I set out on my great
adventure.

I shall impress upon you from the beginning
that I do not pretend to be a composite type of my
countrymen. On the contrary, I ﬁnd that in many
respects I differ from most of them. I have always
tried to ﬁnd things out for myself, and have taken
few things for granted because they were always
done and believed. I have often come to the
parting of the ways and found I must take a dif-
ferent road from that of my ‘former countrymen,
notably in politics and religion. I am, in fact, so
different from them that I have to ﬂatter myself
with Macaulay’s saying, that the judicious are al-
ways a minority.

I was born in Norway in 1863 near the town of
Tromso, the little city that so often in late'years
has made the headlines in our daily press, being the
outﬁtting'point of several arctic expeditions. It
was from there that Nobile set out on his ill-fated
cruise, and from there that Roald Amundson, the
brave Viking, went to his watery grave. Lately
the name is being changed to Troms, in conformity
with the nationalistic craze that has swept over
Norway as well as the rest of Europe since the war.
Throndhjern is now supposed to be Nidaros, and
Christiania is Oslo. And the new nations of Cen-
tral Europe have made so many changes in the
nomenclature of their cities that you have to have
a geographical dictionary at hand when reading
the news.

My father was a carpenter and builder, and
although poor in this world’s goods was well
educated, was of good family and a man of some
distinction. Many of the large white buildings
you may see when travelling along the coast of
Norway from Throndhjem to Tromso were his
handiwork or were at least designed by him. Al—
though he associated with and was affable to every-
body, by his taste and education he belonged to the
—shall I call it bourgeoisie?

We have no Class distinction in our country
except the gulf that always separates the very poor
and the very rich from the great majority, and the
natural distinction between the uncouth and the
more polished. Norway had and still has no no-
bility, but there are nevertheless two very distinct
classes or rather castes, the so-called bourgeoisie

and the common people; and the cleavage between
the two classes was very sharp, and the instrument
that separated them was too often the accident of
birth. These classes never mingled in a social way.
This, I admit, was often justiﬁed, for enlightened
and educated people can ﬁnd no pleasure in as-
sociation with unmannerly and boorish ones. How-
ever, this aloofness was often mere snobbery. From
the bourgeoisie were recruited all officials, mer-
chants, and manufacturers. Rich people were
admitted to their rank if their education, speech
and manner passed muster. Of course, ability will
always ﬁnd the way to the top, and some from the
s0-called lower classes often held high office in
the nation, and even ﬁlled the seat of the premier
with credit.

The bourgeoisie of Norway was an able and
progressive class and has given the world many
great men in all lines of endeavor. Some of them,
however, especially of the later additions to the
class, the parvenus, were very conscious of their
importance and would look with contempt on those
below them in the social scale. I have met a few
of them here; looking with disdain on our endeav-
ors and despising our intellectual efforts. Before
the war many of these, refusing to do manual labor,
would land in the liquor business.

My parents’ place being a couple of dozen
miles from town, I received my education in the
common school. The teachers 'of these schools
had no high school education but only two years’
training in a normal seminary. The schools them-
selves were often conducted in a farmhouse or

other hired building, as schoolhouses were few and
far between. The equipment was often deﬁcient
if not altogether lacking. The length of the school
year, in my district at least, was only twelve weeks
divided up in three four-week terms; and the
teacher was obliged to travel from one district to
another as the terms began. You would naturally
think that the net results of these efforts would not
amount to very much knowledge imparted in the
youngsters’ mind, especially when I tell you that
two hours each day (or one-third of the time) was
devoted to Bible and religious studies.

Yet it is astonishing how much we could ab-
sorb in this short time. There was no effort made
to teach anything secular but the three R’s, but this
effort was intensive. Every evening we had long
lessons to learn, and even between terms we had a
large amount of homework. But we also acquired
a knowledge of many subjects that were not in our
curriculum.

Every home was supposed to teach its young-
sters to read and write before they entered school
at about the age of seven, and nearly every one did.
This saved time, as the new pupil could begin With
texts equal in diﬂiculties to our third reader. Our
later readers were entirely different from any in
use in our schools here. They were in fact a whole
compendium of knowledge. From them we got
a smattering of physics, astronomy, zoology, bot-
any, and many of the other sciences, even some
political economy; besides the best in Scandinavian
and foreign literature. I must say here that one of
my teachers for a short time was Knut Hamsun,

who later received the Nobel prize for literature.
He had already written a short novel, which I read

and did not think much of; but looking back at it
now With a more mature mind, I can see in it the
master at interpreting the thoughts.and speech of
the common people that he proved to be.

By the time we were fourteen or ﬁfteen years
old we were supposed to have absorbed the neces-
sary knowledge for our simple lives. We could
read our papers and our literature intelligently
and had some knowledge of science, art, and
beauty. I must also mention that, during our en-
tire school life, one hour each day was devoted to
song and music, a practice which greatly helped to
develop our esthetic sense.

Considering the short school year, I think this
system was very successful in imparting a modicum
of knowledge. Our children attend school nine or
ten months each year, and it takes twelve years of
their lives before they ﬁnish high school. I doubt
if they acquire more knowledge useful in after
life to the average student than we did in our short
school life. We try to teach many different sub—
jects, and nearly half of these are only of use to
those who intend to enter a college. Why not leave
those out to be taken up in the academies? In our
high schools we give instruction in algebra, geom-
etry, trigonometry, and chemistry, and not
enough of any of these to be of any use to the stud-
ent after leaving school. In fact, the students for-
get them a short time after graduation. They are
supposed to develop the student’s mind and teach
him to think. Then we pay slight attention to the

classics and the modern languages, which certainly
will enrich the mind of the student and teach him
to think, more than any theorem in mathematics.

We educate our children ﬁrst of all to be good
citizens of our great country, but we neglect en-
tirely to teach them the ﬁrst principles of political
economy, a science that every voter in a free
country should know something of. Many of our
legislators are woefully ignorant of this science,
and some of their bills and proposals would be
laughed down by their constituency if the voters
were somewhat grounded in this science. I do not
mean to say that the principles of Adam Smith are
infallible. Modern conditions seem to prove the
contrary, but insofar as they interpret the traits of
human nature they are unchangeable ..... I must
beg pardon for this digression7 must admit I know
very little about the American school—but fools
go in where angels fear to tread.

I attended this school for seven years. It took
me some time to get interested, but by the time I
was ten years old my mind seemed to open up and
I devoured every book I could get hold of. My
father had but a small library. Some of its books
took me quite a time to master. One of these books
was a Latin grammar. The book was then more
than a hundred years old, and was printed in the
peculiar type of the 18th century. Most of the
rules and exceptions were in rhythm and rhyme to
make it easier for the student to memorize them.
But the instruction was sound, and I learned nearly
”the whole book by heart. I have since had no in-
struction in the Latin language, but can yet With

the help of a dictionary spell my way through
Caesar and Cicero.

When I was ﬁfteen years of age, after being
conﬁrmed I went to Tromso, where my brother
was in business, to enter the high school there. I
found, however, after a talk with the rector of the
school that this was not possible. I was too far
behind in some branches of the curriculum so that
I would have to enter classes made up of children
mostly of the age of nine or ten. It appeared that
this school was intended only for children that
were destined to enter an academy or a university,
and had an entirely different curriculum from the
common school. Some branches of learning that
here are taught only in the high schools were begun
by children eight or ten years old. This was espe-
cially the case with German. Some of the text-
books used in the higher grades, notably Greek
texts, were written in German, and that language
was indispensable and had to be learned
thoroughly.

As I could not enter the school, I spent the
winter trying to acquire some of the branches of
learning in which I was behind,—German, alge-
bra, and geometry. As it turned out, however, I
never entered this school for economic reasons but
returned to my parents’ home in the country.
Two of my brothers and a sister had at this time
emigrated to America.

The next two years I spent at home. Here
were few opportunities for continuing my studies
as books were few. However, I managed to get
hold of a few. By this time I also began the study

of the English language: I had no teacher, but
only a grammar, which I learned thoroughly. I
also got hold of some English classics and some of
the newer literature. A brother, who was a sailor,
brought me a set of Lord Lytton’s complete work.
This was heavy food for a beginner, but I read
them through With the help of a dictionary, and
after that I found I could read most any English
newspaper without much difficulty. I had no
help, and my pronunciation was very faulty as I
found out later, but I could read easily.

In the fall of 1882 I entered the Tromso
normal seminary. This institution every year of-
fered a few scholarships to students, who, besides
the regular course of the school, must also take a
course in the Finnish or Lappish languages. The
northern part of Norway has quite a population
of Lapps, who travel on the northern highland
with their reindeer. Also along the coast reside
many Finnish emigrants. In order to educate
their children, the teacher should be somewhat
familiar with their language. This year only four
scholarships were oﬁ‘ered in Finnish and the com-
petition for these places was very keen, as board,
lodging, and books were furnished free to the
lucky ones. I managed to squeeze through, and
spent a very busy year at the seminary, taking up
Finnish and a few other studies besides the regular
course. Oneof my teachers this year was Mr.
Quickstad, who later became a member of the
Cabinet.

The curriculum in the school was the three
R’s, some science, geography, music, and Bible

study, and last but not least physical education.
Some of my fellow students have acquired high
positions. Many are in this country and one, a
roommate of mine, is now a Lutheran minister
near Stevens Point, Wisconsin.

In the spring of 1883 I decided to emigrate
to this country, my brothers here sending me the
ticket and the necessary cash for the journey.

Before starting I sought out an old traveller,
Mr. Dreyer, who lived in Tromso and who was a
good linguist, speaking at least four modern
languages besides his mother tongue. He probably
knew nothing about grammar, but he gave me
considerable help with the pronunciation of the
English language, and I could soon talk with him
quite easily. In fact, before I landed on these
shores, I had no trouble to converse with anybody.
I never attended English classes before or after,
never had a teacher, and still I pride myself on
knowing the language pretty well.

The journey across was very pleasant. I
visited Throndhjem with its old cathedral, then
in process of reconstruction, Visited Bergen, the
busy mercantile mart, and left there April 10th.
The journey across the North Sea to England was
made in ﬁne weather. I spent nearly a week in
Liverpool and got to know that city very well.
We embarked on the Cunard Line steamer Tariﬂa
on April 19th. This ship was a boat of 2000 tons,
smaller than the Norwegian coastwise steamers.
Conditions on board this steamer were very primi-
tive and very different from those on our modern
colossi. I travelled, of course, steerage, and my

room, if it can be called a room, I shared with
three others. The walls were rough board, not
even planed, and the beds were wooden bunks of
the same material nailed against the wall. The
beds had straw mattresses, and we had to furnish
the rest of the clothes. The food was coarse but
- nourishing, and we had to furnish our own dishes
and get them ﬁlled at the ship’s kitchen. We spent
16 days crossing the Atlantic, the last eight days
through fog, and landed in Boston May 6. The
fog lifted as we entered the beautiful harbor of
Boston, with its many green islands.

I was immediately impressed with the hurry
and bustle of this city so different from the quiet
cities of Norway. I was surprised at the speed and
endurance of the negro stevedores who were un-
loading the ship. They did not walk along with
their trucks but were on a run all the time. And
thoughout the uneventful three days’ journey to
the Midwest I was more and more impressed with
the traffic and the enterprise of our cities.

On a bright spring day in early May—and
spring must have been exceptionally early that year
—I landed in Hudson, Wisconsin, where a brother
and a sister of mine were then living. Hudson at
that time was already considered an old town, be-
ing one of the early trading points on the St. CroiX
River. It had, however, no ancient aspect. The
houses were well kept, most of them had a nice
yard, and already shade trees had grown to large
size along the streets. The town has advanced
much since then and has many paved streets and
other improvements, but I do not like the looks of

it so well now as I did then. Probably I have
grown to be more critical. After a brief visit in
this town, I went to St. Paul, Minnesota, where
one of my brothers was then located. I stayed in
that city a year, returning to Hudson the following
spring, and have ever since made my home in
Wisconsin.

My experience during the ﬁrst year in this
country was like that of dozens of other young men
who came to this country at that time or later. We
did not know anything of social conditions or of
business. Although fairly well educated we were
not ﬁt for any special work, even if we did know
the language; and we generally had to work at
manual labor, which was the only thing open to us.
Even here we were often handicapped, coming as
we did from a non—industrial country.

In the spring of 1884, while in St. Paul, I ﬁrst
met up with a political campaign—and it certainly
was an eye opener to me. In Minnesota, at that
time, anyone who had been a resident of the state
for four months could exercise the right of
franchise by taking out his ﬁrst naturalization
papers if twenty—one years of age. These papers
were generally furnished free by the campaign
committees of the different political parties. The
right of suffrage was cheap and was exercised just
as cheaply. No one of my comrades seemed to
know what it was all about. The right of suffrage
in my homeland was not so easily acquired. To be
a voter you had to have a certain amount of real
property, or in the cities to be engaged in some
business or be some kind of an official. The law-

givers were afraid that if the great majority, who
possessed very little, should vote, the right of prop-
erty would not be safe. It has been since found out
that property and money are amply able to take
care of themselves, no matter who votes. Even
my father, who was a man of some substance, could
not vote until he bought a farm home in middle
life. Here, on the contrary, where everyone could
vote, that right was not considered a privilege but
a matter of course and was not prized very highly.

My father had taken an active part in the
politics of his country, and during the 30 years’
strife between the conservative and liberal parties
he was an ardent liberal; and his party eventually
triumphed when a parliamentary system of govern-
ment was inaugurated and John Sverdrup was
made premier. I was of course of the same politics
as my father and was glad of my party’s victory,
but I am not so sure now that this was the best for
the Scandinavian countries. It ﬁnally led to the
separation of Norway and Sweden, two countries
inhabited by the same people, economically a unit
and geographically but one country. This is, how-
ever, but a small part of the nationalistic craze that
has swept over Europe lately. Every little national
group has acquired a government of its own and
set up its own custom barrier, elected a lot of un-
necessary officers, trained an army of its own, thus
increasing its expenses many fold. Then, all the
new countries are always troubled with large
minorities of non—nationals that they generally try

to suppress, by force if necessary, which action
results in embitterment and hostility.

The St. Paul city election in the spring of 1884-
was peculiar in several respects. The contest re-
volved itself around the election of a coroner. The
mayor, the aldermen, and the rest of the ticket
were almost forgotten, and everyone was shouting
for the election of his favorite candidate for
coroner. The campaign for the encumbent coroner
was ﬁnanced by an undertaking ﬁrm I could still
name, and I have a notion that they stood a good
chance to get their money if their candidate was
elected. Money was spent rather freely, and I my-
self saw one of the agents of the undertaker ﬁrm
hand over to my boss at ﬁve-dollar gold piece with
the instruction to spend it on the boys—which he
did not.

I was somewhat disgusted with the whole
campaign, and although a voter, I kept away from
the poll. I do not now remember which candidate
was a republican and which a democrat. There
was not much difference between them, and there
I made up my mind that both parties were tarred
with the same stick. However, the undertaker’s
candidate was defeated. I was used to elections’
being hotly contested but always for a principle,
and it was a shock to me that this whole show was
but a struggle for personal gain.

Shortly after I moved back to Hudson, in the
summer of 1884, the candidates for President and
Vice President were nominated: Blaine and Logan
on the Republican ticket and Cleveland and
Hendricks 0n the Democratic ticket. This election
was, I believe, the last of the old time spectacular
ones with torchlight processions, bands, and special

trains to the political rallies. I was quite im-
pressed with the show and pomp, but had not up
to a few weeks before election made up my mind
which side to favor, for I could not vote in
Wisconsin where a year’s residence was necessary
before the right of suffrage could be exercised.
Both the Candidates for President were strong and
able men, Mr. Blaine by far the more brilliant,
better versed in higher statescraft and foreign af-
fairs; but he had a slight taint of the credit-
mobilier scandal and many other shady transac-
tions were fastened upon him duriﬁg the campaign,
unjustly, I believe. Mr. Cleveland, on the other
hand, like out A. E. Smith, had a stronger popular
appeal. Though at this time he had not attained
his full power, it was known he had very decided
views on government and, like Mr. Theodore
Roosevelt later, was not a trimmer like most of our
modern politicians.

The tariff, of course, then as now was an issue
and almost the only one. Why this question of
higher or lower tariffs should be a perpetual
political issue, I cannot see. A moderate tariﬂ for
revenue, with incidental protection and a lot of
common sense worked in, is feasible and could be
easily established. Why a complete tariff bill
should be passed every time there is political
change of the administration, I cannot understand.
Why not change a rate or a certain Class of rates
Whenever needed, and change them quickly and
without so much publicity and hearing? The tariff
commission, if it was functioning properly, could
supply all the information needed.

Besides the tariff there was but one issue and
this was the candidates, and that issue was worked
to the limit. They were both roundly abused or
highly praised as the speaker’s politics might be.
Private and public incidents of their careers were
dragged forth and used for a purpose and the
truth was not always respected. Though our
campaigns at present are not what they should be—
educational—still I think the tone of the canvass
is more truthful, and barefaced lies are not counte-
nanced by the national committees. Social and
religious prejudices are still appealed to and with
much success, as was demonstrated during the 1928
campaign.

The year 1884- being but 20 years removed
from the end of the Civil War, the dissensions
engendered during that conﬂict were kept alive
by the Republican orators and used to their ad-
vantage. This was generally referred to as “shak-
ing the bloody shirt.” Even the most prominent
statesmen resorted to this mode of campaigning.
John C. Spooner, later U. S. Senator from Wis-
consin, was never above shaking the bloody shirts
and his speeches had an unpleasant ﬂavor, full of
bitterness.

It was rather difficult for a boy from another
country, unacquainted with traditions and unused
to the bla-bla of our politicians, to arrive at an
opinion on this momentous subject. In fact, I was
at ﬁrst somewhat prejudiced. The adjective re-
publican alone inﬂuenced me as it has hundreds of
other Scandinavians. The republic was the secret
ultimate goal of all Scandinavian liberals; and

the same name here, although only a party designa-
tion, has been a powerful inﬂuence in recruiting
so many fair haired vikings to the Republican
party. However, to me the name democratic soon
sounded just as good. I have always thought since
that year that all the oratorical hot air dissemi—
nated during our campaigns was mostly wasted
effort. While it may appeal to the non-thinking,
emotional voter and probably keeps him in line,
it will never convince a man who but slightly ex-
ercises his gray matter. In fact, it was at a great
Republican rally where I ﬁnally made up my mind
that, if I could vote, I would vote the Democratic
ticket.

This rally was a great affair. There were
special trains running into Hudson that day from
all surrounding towns in Wisconsin, and many
people were present from Stillwater and St. Paul.
Many Clubs were dressed in their uniforms and
their march through the streets was quite impres-
sive. The meeting was in the new skating rink.
The ﬁrst speaker was Ira Bradford of Augusta, a
judge, I believe. He pictured his party as a
splendid ship moving proudly through the ocean,
while the other party was likened to a derelict
armed by a mutinous crew and arriving nowhere.
His speech may have been a masterpiece of rhet—
oric and the peroration sublime, but it contained
few arguments and less conviction. The other
speaker’s name I do not remember, but he certainly
thought he was some orator. He had a strong voice
but his mind was rather weak. “And yet,” he
began, “they say there are no issues” (end of quota-

tion, because that was all that was worth remem-
bering) ; and then he gave us half an hour of bla-
bla, platitudes, and abuse of the other party. He
worked himself up to great excitement, and his
ruddy face took on a purple color till I thought
he might have a stroke or something. Many people
still living will remember him. I saw among
others Mr. O. Arnquist in the audience, and I still
wonder what he thought of the speaker. His speech
set me thinking. I made up my mind that the party
must be very short of real issues (the speaker to
the contrary) when the best they could do was to
set before us a dish such as these two speakers
served. I do not know how I should have voted,
it being a wrench to break away from the Re-
publican party to which most of my compatriots
adhered, but my sympathy was with Cleveland and
Hendricks. When after many days of doubt we
ﬁnally found out that they were elected, and when
things went on as usual in spite of dire predictions,
I lost all faith in the Grand Old Party. Some of
the Republican leaders took this defeat with bad
grace. Mr. Spooner said, as told to me by his son,
Charles, “The fanatical prohibitionists of New
York state have brought the country to ruin”—
meaning that their vote, if given to his party,
would have elected Blaine.

Since that time I have generally voted the
Democratic ticket, although I do not consider my-
self a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat. It is true, I

voted for Bryan in 1896 holding my nose. But in
1908 and 1912 I voted for Roosevelt and Taft re-

spectively. And if I live long enough, I may yet
vote that ticket if the candidate appeals to me.

In 1888 the Democrats lost the election by a
smart trick played by the Republican central com-
mittee. It is strange that the newspapers of the
present day do not seem to remember this clever
snare set for the English Ambassador in Washing-
ton, but I have never seen a newspaper mention it
to this day. It happened thus: An alleged Ameri-
can Citizen of English extraction wrote to the
British Ambassador in Washington asking advice
on how to vote. Of course he was an American,
but blood is thicker than water and he “would not ,
vote to hurt England.” On the tariff question he
was clear. He knew a lower tariff for our country
would beneﬁt England, but Mr. Cleveland had
showed himself very hostile to England in the
Venezuela dispute, for instance. How would the
Ambassador advise him to vote? This sounded
plausible to the Ambassador and he took the bait—
hook, line, and sinker. He wrote the correspond-
ent that although Mr. Cleveland had shown some
hostility toward England in the Venezuelan dis—
pute, this affair was now in a fair way of being
settled, and his advice to the writer was to vote the
Democratic ticket. This letter was published all
over the country the next day, accompanied by
partisan comments. I believe it was quite a factor
in that election, especially in the East, where the
foreign-born element was more or less hostile to
the English. As it was, Mr. Harrison carried
New York, then as now a pivotal state, by a very
slender majority. This campaign on the whole

was carried on more soberly then the previous one
and with less shouting and no more torchlight pro-
cessions.

Mr. Cleveland’s ﬁrst administration was quite
successful: the country was quiet and singularly
free from strikes and other upheavals. His stand
on the Venezuela affair undoubtedly was taken
with an eye to the coming election. His stand was
a bold one and England came to time, although
our country having no navy at that time was in no
condition to enforce its demand. There was no
great turnover and the popular vote was about the
same as in 1884.

What was the course of the complete change
of sentiment in 1892? I cannot say, only state my
own reactions to the events.

The Harrison administration found the
treasury replete and in good condition. The bil-
lion-dollar congress soon changed all this. It was
at this time the great raids on our treasury began
and they have continued ever since. This alienated
many taxpayers. Then there were many strikes,
the Homestead strike among them. Many of these
were handled very untactfully, and some people
lost their lives. This alienated many workmen.
But the main cause of the change in sentiment, I
believe, was Mr. Reed of Maine. Most people
sympathize with the underdog, and Mr. Reed’s
treatment of the minority in the House of Repre-
sentatives was very ruthless. I do not say that he
acted unjustly. An assembly must transact busi-
ness and try to squelch obstructionists; but his
methods were crude, and popular sympathy turned

to the harassed minority. Times were generally
good and it is strange that these causes, if such they
were, could effect such a change in sentiments.

I shall say nothing about the panic and hard
times of 1893 and 1894. They did not affect us in
this corner of the state as much as the present de-
pression does. The farmer had not yet tasted
prosperity, and plodded on as usual. His income
undoubtedly was much smaller than at the present
time (Winter of 1932), but his taxes were much
less and he had not yet got his tastes for present
day luxuries. The administration, of course, was
blamed for the hard times just as the administra—
tion at the present time is. Mr. Cleveland certainly
could not be the cause of the crash because it began
four months before he took office. Mr. Hoover
has no such alibi, because he succeeded a Republi-
can administration. This last, however, I believe
was somewhat to blame because they helped build
a sand house of speculation, which any thinking
man must see would soon topple over. It’s true,
the administration did not start the orgy, but it
rather encouraged it than tried to put brakes on it.
This responsibility it cannot dodge.

Why I voted for Bryan in 1896 is difficult to
say. I mistrusted his free silver theory, but I ad-
mired the man very much. I disliked the leader—
ship of Mark Hanna and his method. I do not
believe that, if Mr. Bryan had been elected, all
the dire predictions made by orators during the
campaign would have come true. Indeed I believe
a period of inﬂation would have been accompanied
by at least some prosperity. Inﬂation is like drink-

ing whiskey: a little of it makes you happy, too
much will make you drunk.

I dislike very much the politician who is
afraid of expressing his opinion, fearing he might
lose a few votes. Look at their attitude towards
prohibition. How many are we sure as to which
side of the fence they are on? I desire very much
to see Congress vote on this question if for no other
reason than to bring the members out in the open.
Mr. Bryan knew and let everyone else know
where he stood. M r. Theodore Roosevelt was the
same kind of man, and I am glad I supported them
'both.

It may justly be said about the Republican
party in 1912 that whom the gods would destroy
they ﬁrst make mad. Everyone know, and leaders
of the Republican party certainly also must have
known, that Mr. Roosevelt was more popular and
would have a better chance of winning the election,
than Mr. Taft. His nomination was forced, not
because Mr. Taft was loved more, but because Mr.
Roosevelt was loved less. The tradition of re-
nominating the incumbent probably did not have
much to do With the result of the convention. The
ruling spirits of the Republican party disliked and
were afraid of Mr. Roosevelt, who could not be
bent to anyone’s will against his judgment. I do
not think Mr. Taft could have been elected even
if there had been no split in the party; although
he was an honorable and clean gentleman. His
fault, if any, was that he let the party leaders have
too much rope—of which they took all the advan-
tage they could. His unpopularity was mostly due

to the fact that he did not take the people into his
conﬁdence, and they in turn forgot all about him.
Mr. Taft had a clear head and great executive
ability. His remarks on the effect of the 18th
Amendment turned out to be a true prophecy.
When he died last year a statement was given out
that he had retracted his ﬁrst remark and admitted
he was mistaken. I do not want to accuse anyone
of prevaricating but I doubt the truth of this last
statement. Many people, including myself,
thought the 18th Amendment would be a greater
blessing to the country than any other law passed in
recent years. They are not so sure after thirteen
years. That Mr. Taft, who foresaw what was com—
ing and then saw his prediction come true, could
state these things were not so, is more than I can
believe, if his mind was still clear.

Although a great admirer of Mr. Roosevelt,
I voted for Wilson both in 1912 and in 1916. Mr.
Wilson being a student of history and having a
non-political mind, I expected his administration
would to a certain extent discount the inﬂuence of
political leaders, and that the President would
work out his own ideas of government. In this
belief I was not much mistaken.

My reactions to the stirring events of the war
from 1914 to 1918 were somewhat mixed. I am
old enough to remember the Franco-Prussian War
of 1870 and then my (or rather my people’s) sym-
pathy was very much for the French. But looking
back on that conﬂict and having read history in a
more unbiased manner, I think the German con-
duct of the war was as humane as such a struggle

can possibly be. War is a bloody and senseless
way of settling differences between nations, and
the very conduct of it tends to harden and embitter
all who take part in it. It dulls all feeling of
tenderness and pity, and brutalizes man, that
should be the image of God.

If we have read history right—I do not mean
the history of rival princes and 0f bloody battles,
but the history of the development of the human
race—we can come to but one conclusion, the
unity and confederation of mankind. I have no
Utopian dream of a sudden unity of mankind
through a league of nations or any other agency,
but a belief that only through such agencies can
any progress be made. It may take thousands of
years but our civilization, only about 4-00 years old,
is itself but a ﬂash in the pan considering the time
it has taken to develop us this far. Science has
developed and is still putting in our hands weapons
and agencies of destruction, more and more terri-
ble. But man himself is gradually changing from
a selﬁsh and cruel beast to a more humane being.
They say his nature does not change, but I believe
that in an unchanging law-ordered universe, man
is the only thing that does change. It is a far cry
from our brutish ancestor, whose hand was against
every living being and against whom every hand
was raised. Even through historic time we see the
Change in man. The Greek and Roman civiliza-
tions, still our model, were but civilizations of the
few, and even the most enlightened of those few
had no thought, sympathy, or pity for the majority
of mankind—the slaves and the laborers. Plato

in his model republic could not conceive of a gov-
ernment without slave labor.

But the greatest change in man has un-
doubtedly taken place during the last 400 years.

Macaulay in the ﬁrst volume of his history,
in the chapter on the state of England in 1685,
comments on the change that has taken place in
the Englishmen of the last 200 years. People, he
says, would jeer at suffering and pelt with stones
and brickbats the unfortunates who were placed
in the gibbet, often for a small offense. Theologians
attribute this change to Christianity, and this may
be partly true, as Jesus’ kingdom of God was a
reign of unselﬁshness and compassion. But His
teaching in this respect has too often been neg-
lected, and the church itself has often committed
the most cruel atrocities. However, if reason and
the idea of self—preservation fail to stop war, this
growing trait of human nature Will in the end
overcome the unspeakable cruelties of armed con-
ﬂict.

When our country entered the war in 1917——
and justly, I thought, being provoked into this
action by the senseless and inhuman treatment of
our ships and sailors by the central powers—I be—
lieved the ﬁght would be waged with our military
forces, army and navy only, and the people in gen-
eral would be left out of it pretty much, except for
furnishing the sinews of war.

For the Golden Wedding Anniversary of Mr.
and Mrs. Swan Berglund, celebrated by the
gathering of relatives and friends at the M. E.
Church, Deer Park, W'isconsin, on March
12th, 1926.

Good wishes and felicitations

On this your Golden Wedding day,
Long may continue your relations

' In happy union, now we pray.

You worked and made from love and duty
A garden of a wilderness

From marsh and swamp, a ﬁeld of beauty
And all your tasks the Lord would bless.

Of rugged race, of sturdy stature;

A stalwart man, a noble wife;

(The proudest work of mother nature) ;
A useful tho’ an unknown life.

The daily Virtues bring no praises

And useful toil will bring no fame,

Small tasks well done and thousand graces
Of daily life, no press proclaim.

While published wide are sin and sorrow,
And rampant crime seems holding sway
Till we must tremble for tomorrow

And view with fear another day.

But there is yet a ﬁrm foundation,
A trusty solid cornerstone,

That safely carries on the nation,
The millions unsung and unknown.

Who do their tasks, perform their duty
And hear the call if danger looms.

A life of piety and beauty,

Like these our honored bride and groom.

We do not come With idle chatter,
Nor empty sentiments to state.
We come not to acclaim or ﬂatter;
We come ourselves to dedicate.

We would aspire to emulation

Of such a noble useful life.

Would keep serene thru life’s mutation,
Thru joy, success or toilsome strife.

Would do our duties by our neighbor,
In daily life, in church, in state.
Would never Shirk the meanest labor,
And help misfortune to abate.

Would help to break detaining fetters,
And leave more beauty, Oh, much more.
Our spot, our country somewhat better
And somewhat sweeter than before.

And thus by faithfully performing
The varied tasks each day shall bring,
We have the promise, that the Master
Will set us over greater things.

For the Golden Wedding Anniversary of Mr.
and Mrs. Eilert Isaacson, Black Brook, cele-
brated with friends and relatives in the M. E.

Church, Deer Park, Wisconsin, on October
28th, 1928.

We are assembled as your guests,
This pleasant festive day,

To Wish godspeed and happiness
Much more than we can say.

The ﬁfty busy years seem short,
When you look back today;

Much toil and labor they have held,
But also joy and play.

Much sorrow have they bro’t to you,
Much heartbreak, ache and pain,
But even these, tho hard and grim
Were not endured in vain.

For thru it all, no bitterness

In hearts and tho’ts endure.

You kept your mind serene and sweet,
Your actions kind and pure.

Would always reach a helping hand
With kindliness and speed,

And sacriﬁce well earned rest,
Whenever there was need.

That’s Why we have come to wish you well
And joy with one accord,

The place you hold in all our hearts

Is part of your reward.

Tho youthful pleasures don’t appeal
And tho you’re old and bent,
There will be following no regrets,
When life was Wisely spent.

The tho’tless youth of present day,
Owe all to pioneers’ deed,

Who cleared and broke the Virgin grou
And scattered plenteous seed.

A garden from a Wilderness
The miracle you wrought.

A civilized enlightened land
Where savage Indian fought.

You did your share unﬂinchingly;
Your job you would not Shirk.

We owe you thanks for kindly deed,
And for enduring work.

All fame is ﬂeeting and some names
On every lip today,

Shall they but be a memory
Tomorrow, Who shall say?

But things that can’t be blotted out
And always Will endure

Are neighborly and kindly deeds
And their reward is sure.

For grace and kindness cannot die
And deed that’s true and brave.
For said the Lord, they follow us
Thru death beyond the grave.

THE REIGN OF THE PINE

Gone are the shrubs and ﬂowers,
Buried the trailing Vine,
Withered the verdurous b0Wers;
This is the time of the pine.

Stripped of its living cover,
Thus paying nature’s bill,
Distant and coy like a lover
Rises the distant hill.

Then, says the pine to the hilltop,
Now is our time to give

Color and grace to the landscape—
NOW is our time to live.

Flummery all has vanished,
Flowers and leaves are gone;
All but my green is banished;
Ours is the Victory won.

And the great world so empty,
Ours Without any cost,

Let’s make it a temple of splendor,
And a jewel of snow and frost.

Says to the pine the hilltop:

A picture as ever was seen

Will we paint on the world together
With my white and your beautiful green.

Yours be the life and color,

The shimmering background mine.
Thus through the wintry twilight
Talketh the hill to the pine.

And when the wintry season,
Desolate, dark, and drear,
Almost conquers our reason,
Filleth our minds with fear—.

Look at the snowclad pine tree,
Silent, majestic, and still,
Softly Whispering love songs
To the distant towering hill.

And when the chilling blizzards
Through sturdy branches sing,
Covering hills and verdure,

It’s but a promise of Spring.

(unﬁnished)

As one more milepost passes by,
Your heart from sorrow sore,
We come to bring some friendly cheer

And wish you many more.

For time Will dull the sorrow’s edge;
Make wound, now bleeding, whole;
And bring serenity and peace

To troubled heart and soul.

Yes, blessed time Will bury deep

The present piercing pain.

The clouds will pass, the sun Will shine,
For Faith is not in vain.

For life would be a heavy load,
With doubts and fears beset,

If bygone sorrows always stayed
And we could not forget.

And, though your hair is turning gray
And age has taken toll,

Your soul has grown serene and strong,
And we would not condole.

For where life’s lessons all we have
Applied and rightly learned,
Then also, peace, serenity,

And gladness we have earned.

OUR FLAG

It proudly waved in peace and war.
Now must its ﬂuttering cease,

Or be unfurled for evermore

In the pursuits of peace?

T0 marts of trade in foreign lands,
To many a harbor strange,

It took the products of our hands
From city and from grange.

From mountains, Where the eagle soars,
And from the desert sands,

It willingly brought to our shores
The toil of alien hands.

’Mid arctic ice, ’neath burning sun,

It ﬂuttered t0 the breeze,
And sturdy men pushed on and on;

Now shall their efforts cease?

Must the adventurous hardy tars
Acknowledge they are beat?

And must our ﬂag, The Stripes and Stars,
Be lowered in defeat?

Defeat, 0 no! must not be said!
Unfurl it to the breeze.
It must, as ere in peaceful trade
Traverse the seven seas.

Must we but wave it from our hand
To busy native sons,

This emblem of the promised land,
Behind our frowning guns.

It’s been an angel to distressed
And needy oftentimes;

A morning star to the oppressed
In many lands and climes.

No glistening guns, no armored hosts,
Can right the nation’s wrong.

Then let us in the coming years
Forget that we are strong;

Think less of war and less of might,
Trust less in guns and steel;

And hope that we by doing right
May help the world to heal.